Kubernetes-
open source container orchestration tool, helps to manage contaners in different environments.

features -
High availability
Scalability / high performance
Disaster recfovery- backup and restore


Kubernetes architecture-
kubernetes cluster is made of-
1. Master Node- virutal or physical machine
2.Worker nodes- referred as Nodes, each node has a KUBELET process running on it.

KUBELET is a process to comunnicate nodes with each other.
Actual work is happening on worker nodes as there are multiple containers on it and applications are running.

On MASTER NODE K8s processes are running, to run and manage cluster .

1. API SEERVER- entrypoint to the k8s cluster
UI,API & CLI(terminal) will communivate with API SERVER

2.Controller manager- keep tracks of whats happening in the cluster

3. Scheduler- decides on which node new pod should be scheduled, it ensures pods placement based on storage of container.

4. ETCD- kubernetes backing store, it has all config and status data of each node. used for recovering whole cluster.

5.Virtual network- it enables worker nodes, master nodes talks to each other. It turns all nodes inside of cluster into a powerful machine.

Worker nodes has higher workload and much bigger resources as they are running multiple containers

Master nodes is much more imp than individual worker node, bcoz it manages the access to the cluster.

We can  create multiple master nodes.



KUBERNETES COMPONENTS-

1.NODE- virtual or physical machine
2.POD - smallest unit in kubernetes, it is abstraction over container, it creates a running environment over a container.

Each pod has an internal ip address, so pod communicates with each other through ip. 
3. SERVICES- permanent ip address that can be attached to each pod.
EXTERNAL SERVICE- to expose port (my app)
INTERNAL SERVICE- to hide port (database)
INGRESS- request goes to ingress and then to service.

4.Config Map-
external configuration of our application, we connect this to pod, it is used to easily change name of service, example- DB_URL=mongo_db

config map is used only for non-confidential data.

5.SECRET-
Used to store secret data (credentials), in a base 64 encoded format, still it doesnt make it secure, so anyone can access it, to encrypt them use third party tools.

6.VOLUME-
it attaches storage to a pod, storage could be on local machine, or remote that is outside the K8S cluster.

7.Deployment & StatefulSet-
Replicate everything on another node, which will be connected to service, even if a pod dies then the another pod is available.
Service is a load balancer- it will see the request and forward it to whichever pod is least busy.

Deployment - is a blueprint for creating pods, we will not be replicating pods, we will be creating deployments and there we will specify the no. of pods.


StatefulSet- used for replicating the Database.
Database are often hosted outside of Kubernetes Cluster.


KUBERNETES CONFIGURATION-

API SERVER- kubernetes client ie UI,CLI,API,or kubectl sends configuration request to api server, its the entrypoint to K8S Cluster.
this request must be in yaml or json format.

3 PARTS OF CONFIGURATION FILES-
1.Metadata
2.Specification
3.status- its automatically generated by kubernetes.

example of a config file-
nginx-deployment.yaml -name of the file

apiVersion: v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
name: nignx_deployment
labels:-
specs:
replicas:2


etcd holds the current status of any kubernetes component so status data gets updated in config file from the etcd.

yaml files have strict identation.



production cluster setup-
1.multiple master and worker nodes.
2.separate virtual or actual machines.

MINIKUBE- is a opensource tool, one node cluster where master processes and worker processes both run on one node. docker is pre installed, so we can run containers on this node.

KUBECTL-
coomandline tool for K8S cluster. used for creating pods on node and iinteract with K8S cluster.
to create any comonent on cluster we need to interact with api server and to do so we use KUBECTL. its most powerful tool.

MINIKUBE Commands-
1.minikube start- to start cluster
also install the driver.

2.kubectl get node- 
shows all the nodes


in  a Configuration file-

metadata: - is a name of the app

data: - actual contents key-value pairs that we define here,
ex- data:
	USER_NAME: ABCD
	USER_PASSWORD: EFGH


Deployment configuration file-
a yaml file will be used for deployment and service.

apiVersion: v1
kind: Deployment (its the blueprint for pods)
template: configuration for pod
it has its own metadata and own spec section.

in the spec of pod we have defination of containers.



ex-
template:
metadata:
labels:
app:nginx
specs:
containers:
-name:mongodb
image: mongo:5.0
ports:
 -containerPort:27017

labels- labels are key/value pairs that are attached to k8s resources. they are identifiers. we could identify all the replicas of pods by their common label though pods have unique name.


Label Selectors-
identifies a set of resources, matches all pods with same labels.

ex- 
spec:
	replicas:1
	selector:
		matchLabels:
			app:nginx


we can add service configuration in this deployment configuration yaml file.

Service Configuration-

ex-
apiVersion:v1
kind: Service
metadata:
name:mongo_service
spec:
selector:
app:Myapp
ports:
 -protocol:TCP
 port:80
 targetPort:27017


 explanagtion-
 kind: service
 name: service name
 selector- selects pods to forward the request to service.
port- service port
targetPort- containerPort of deployment


to pass environment variables to the configuration we use env.
ex- 
env:
 -name: env variable name
 value: env variable value


 if env variables are in secret.yaml we use
example-
 env:
  -name: USER
  valueFrom:
  secretKeyRef:
  name: mongo-secret
  key: mongo-password

  OR if env variables are in config.yaml we use

  example-
  env:
  -name: DB_URL
   valueFrom:
   configMapKeyRef:
   name:mong0-config
   key:mongo-url


To access our application from URL we will use External services.

to make our internal service external, we change the spec.
type: seervice type,
default: ClusterIP- its an internal service.
we will add a NodePort which will expose the service on each nodes ip at static port.
node port must be between 30000 - 32767
<NodeIP>:<NodePort>

ex-
spec:
type: NodePort
selector:
app:webapp
ports:
 -protocol:TCP
 port:3000
 targetPort:3000
 nodePort: 30100



 TO DEPLOY THE COMPONENTS ON CLUSTER-

 Commands-
 1.kubectl apply -f <file-name.yaml>
 apply manages application through files defining k8s resources.

 2.kubectl get all
 gives all the components created in the cluster.

 3. kubectl get <component name>
 ex - kubectl get pod
 kubectl get secret
 

 4. kubectl describe <resourceType> <resourceName>
 to get detailed information with "describe" command.


 ex- kubectl describe service webapp-service
 it will show more detailed output about that component

 5.kubectl logs <podName>
 to view logs of container


to access the app at browser, we use ip of minikube.
terminal command- minikube ip
to get ip.





